.TH CAGE 1 "June 2026" "cage" "Cage Manual"
.SH NAME
cage \- minimal age-backed 1Password environment secret manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cage
[--config PATH] [--verbose] [--debug] COMMAND [ARGS]
.PP
.B cage get
[--profiles LIST] [--environments LIST] [--skip-cache|--refresh-cache] [--json] ENV_VAR|*
.PP
.B cage exec
[--profiles LIST] [--environments LIST] [--skip-cache|--refresh-cache] -- COMMAND [ARG...]
.PP
.B cage cache
list|status|prune|clear ...
.PP
.B cage environment
create|cache|list|delete ...
.PP
.B cage profile
create|list|delete ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cage
loads 1Password Environments using age-protected 1Password service account tokens.
It is macOS-only and uses a single global config file at
.BR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/cage/config.toml ,
falling back to
.BR ~/.config/cage/config.toml .
Set
.B CAGE_CONFIG
or pass
.B --config PATH
to use another config; the flag takes precedence.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Identity and provider file paths must be relative paths that stay within the config file directory.
Supported identity types are
.BR basic ,
.BR yubikey ,
and
.BR secure-enclave .
Supported provider type is
.BR 1password .
Supported environment type is
.BR 1password-environment .
.PP
Environment entries may include an optional encrypted cache object, for example
.BR "cache = { ttl = \"15m\", identity = \"local\" }" .
The TTL must be a positive Go duration string. Changing the TTL caps already-written entries by the current config TTL. Cache files are stored under
.BR ${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-$HOME/.cache}/cage/environments/
and cache state is tracked in
.BR ${XDG_STATE_HOME:-$HOME/.local/state}/cage/cage.db .
.SH RESOLUTION
Profiles and environments are selected with comma-separated
.B --profiles
and
.B --environments
flags, or with
.B CAGE_PROFILES
and
.BR CAGE_ENVIRONMENTS .
Flags override environment variables. Profiles load first in order, then explicit environments. Last loaded variable wins. There is no default profile.
.PP
Configured encrypted caches are used before pulling from 1Password. Use
.B --skip-cache
to avoid cache reads and writes, or
.B --refresh-cache
to pull fresh values and update configured caches.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B cage identity basic create NAME
Create a native age identity, write
.BR NAME.identity
with mode 0600, and update config.
.TP
.B cage identity yubikey create NAME
Create a YubiKey identity, write
.BR NAME.identity
with mode 0600, and update config.
.TP
.B cage identity se create NAME
Create a Secure Enclave identity, write
.BR NAME.identity
with mode 0600, and update config.
.TP
.B cage provider 1p create NAME --identity IDENTITY
Read a 1Password service account token securely or from stdin, encrypt it to one identity, write
.BR NAME.1p.age
with mode 0600, and update config.
.TP
.B cage environment create NAME --provider PROVIDER --uuid UUID
Create a 1Password Environment config entry. Add
.B --cache-ttl DURATION --cache-identity IDENTITY
to enable encrypted caching for that Environment.
.TP
.B cage environment cache set NAME --ttl DURATION --identity IDENTITY [--overwrite]
Add encrypted cache settings for a configured Environment. Use
.B --overwrite
with both settings to replace existing cache settings.
.TP
.B cage environment cache unset NAME
Remove encrypted cache settings from a configured Environment. Existing cache data can be removed with
.BR "cage cache clear NAME" .
.TP
.B cage environment list
List configured environments.
.TP
.B cage environment delete NAME
Delete an environment config entry if no profile references it.
.TP
.B cage profile create NAME --environments ENV[,ENV...]
Create a flat profile from configured environments.
.TP
.B cage profile list
List configured profiles.
.TP
.B cage profile delete NAME
Delete a profile.
.TP
.B cage cache list [--json]
List configured encrypted Environment caches and cache entries for the current config without printing secret values.
.TP
.B cage cache status [ENVIRONMENT] [--json]
Show encrypted Environment cache metadata and usability status for one environment or all configured cache entries.
.TP
.B cage cache prune
Remove expired, inactive, missing, and unreadable encrypted Environment cache entries for the current config.
.TP
.B cage cache clear ENVIRONMENT|--all
Clear encrypted Environment cache entries for one environment or all environments in the current config.
.TP
.B cage cache launchd install [--interval DURATION] [--overwrite]
Install, enable, bootstrap, and kickstart a per-user launchd LaunchAgent that periodically runs
.BR "cage cache prune" .
The plist is written to
.BR ~/Library/LaunchAgents/co.2h2d.cage.cache-prune.plist .
Logs are written to
.BR ~/Library/Logs/co.2h2d.cage.cache-prune.log
and
.BR ~/Library/Logs/co.2h2d.cage.cache-prune-error.log .
Set
.B CAGE_CACHE_PRUNE_LAUNCHD_LABEL
for advanced parallel/testing setups that need a different launchd label and derived plist/log names.
.TP
.B cage cache launchd uninstall
Disable, unload, and remove the periodic cache prune LaunchAgent.
.TP
.B cage get ENV_VAR
Print a single resolved value. Missing variables exit with status 1.
.TP
.B cage get '*'
Print all resolved variables as KEY=value lines for simple values. Values are not shell-quoted; multiline values can span output lines. Use
.B --json
for multiline or machine-readable output.
.TP
.B cage exec -- COMMAND
Replace cage with COMMAND where supported, inheriting the parent environment overlaid with resolved variables. OP_SERVICE_ACCOUNT_TOKEN is removed from the child environment.
.TP
.B cage completion SHELL
Generate shell completions for bash, zsh, fish, or powershell.
.TP
.B cage man DIR
Generate full roff manpages for cage and subcommands.
.SH SECURITY NOTES
Provider tokens are decrypted only in memory to initialize the 1Password SDK. 1Password Environments are not cached in memory across loads. Optional on-disk Environment caches are always age-encrypted to the configured cache identity. Expired, inactive, unreadable, and replaced cache files are removed with normal file deletion; cache secrecy relies on age encryption, not overwrite passes. Config directories, config files, identity files, provider files, cache directories, cached Environment files, and the cache state database must be owned by the current user and not accessible by group or others. cage strips common credential, injection, and debug environment variables from age plugin subprocesses and redacts common secret-looking values in errors. Use --verbose for high-level diagnostics or --debug for extra details.
.SH PROJECT
.UR https://github.com/2h2d-co/cage
.UE
.SH LICENSE
MIT. Copyright (c) Two Humans and Two Dogs LLC (2h2d.co).
